docs: tw-1013-sequencer (#3536)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/sequencer.mdx

---
title: The Sequencer and censorship resistance
description: 'Learn the fundamentals of the Arbitrum Sequencer.'
author: pete-vielhaber
sme: Mehdi
user_story: As a current or prospective Arbitrum user, I need to learn more about the Sequencer.
content_type: concept
---

> The <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer">Sequencer’s</a> job is to receive, admit, and order <a data-quicklook-from="transaction">transactions</a> and then publish and post the resulting blocks. The moment ordered transactions are handed to the execution engine, responsibility shifts to the <a data-quicklook-from="state-transition-function">State Transition Function (STF)</a> and <a data-quicklook-from="arbos">ArbOS</a>, where transactions are executed against the chain state, gas is metered, and the new state root is computed. Throughout this section, we flag those handoff points and point to the relevant pages rather than duplicating them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer">Sequencer’s</a> job is to receive, admit, and order <a data-quicklook-from="transaction">transactions</a> and then publish and post the resulting blocks. The moment ordered <a data-quicklook-from="transaction">transactions</a> are handed to the execution engine, responsibility shifts to the <a data-quicklook-from="state-transition-function">State Transition Function (STF)</a> and <a data-quicklook-from="arbos">ArbOS</a>, where transactions are executed against the chain state, gas is metered, and the new state root is computed. Throughout this section, we flag those handoff points and point to the relevant pages rather than duplicating them.
```

Author: duplicate from above

#### 2. Block creation loop

The Sequencer runs a tight loop that drains its queues and groups transactions into a block. It services three queues in priority order: auction-resolution transactions first, then a retry queue, then the regular queue—and, after the first transaction, keeps draining for a brief period (10ms by default) so multiple transactions land in a single block. Lightweight pre-checks happen here: per-transaction data-size limits, a base-fee check, and a nonce cache that parks too-high nonces and revives them once their predecessor succeeds. The loop also confirms that the parent-chain block number and timestamp are within an acceptable range before producing a block.

#### 3. Handoff to ArbOS and the STF

> Once the Sequencer has a finalized ordering, it calls the ExecutionEngine, which in turn invokes ArbOS to produce the block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the Sequencer has a finalized ordering, it calls the ExecutionEngine, which in turn invokes <a data-quicklook-from="arbos">ArbOS</a> to produce the block.
```

Author: duplicate from above

<VanillaAdmonition type="note" title="Handoff: execution belongs to ArbOS and the STF">

Everything from this point of execution—iterating the ordered transactions, applying pre- and post-execution filters, running each transaction against chain state, metering child- and parent-chain gas, and computing the resulting state—is the job of the [State Transition Function](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/01-stf-gentle-intro.mdx) and [ArbOS](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/arbos.mdx). The Sequencer supplies the ordered input and receives a produced block in return; it does not decide execution outcomes.

</VanillaAdmonition>

#### 4. Persistence and broadcast

> The produced block comes back to the Sequencer as a sequenced message. The TransactionStreamer persists it to the local database and, if a coordinator is configured, replicates it to Redis for high availability. It then hands the message to the Broadcaster, which pushes it to subscribers over the <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer-feed">real-time feed</a>. This is the moment users get [<a data-quicklook-from="soft-confirmation">soft finality</a>](/how-arbitrum-works/reference/finality-and-reorgs.mdx#the-three-confirmation-levels): a sub-second provisional confirmation that depends on the Sequencer behaving honestly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The produced block comes back to the Sequencer as a sequenced message. The TransactionStreamer persists it to the local database and, if a coordinator is configured, replicates it to Redis for high availability. It then hands the message to the Broadcaster, which pushes it to subscribers over the <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer-feed">real-time feed</a>. This is the moment users get [<a data-quicklook-from="soft-confirmation">soft finality</a>](/how-arbitrum-works/reference/finality-and-reorgs.mdx#the-three-confirmation-levels): a sub-second provisional <a data-quicklook-from="confirmation">confirmation</a> that depends on the Sequencer behaving honestly.
```

Author: duplicate

#### 5. Posting to the parent chain

> Independent of the loop above, the <a data-quicklook-from="batch-poster">batch poster</a> reads sequenced messages from the TransactionStreamer, Brotli-compresses them with adaptive [compression levels](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/gas-and-fees.mdx#compression-levels), and posts them to the <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer-inbox">Sequencer Inbox</a> using either calldata or EIP-4844 blobs. To configure this component, see [Run a batch poster](/launch-arbitrum-chain/run-a-node/batch-poster.mdx). Once those batches are finalized on the parent chain, the transactions reach [<a data-quicklook-from="hard-finality">hard finality</a>](/how-arbitrum-works/reference/finality-and-reorgs.mdx#the-three-confirmation-levels).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Independent of the loop above, the <a data-quicklook-from="batch-poster">batch poster</a> reads sequenced messages from the TransactionStreamer, Brotli-compresses them with adaptive [compression levels](/how-arbitrum-works/deep-dives/gas-and-fees.mdx#compression-levels), and posts them to the <a data-quicklook-from="sequencer-inbox">Sequencer Inbox</a> using either calldata or EIP-4844 <a data-quicklook-from="blob">blobs</a>. To configure this component, see [Run a batch poster](/launch-arbitrum-chain/run-a-node/batch-poster.mdx). Once those batches are finalized on the parent chain, the transactions reach [<a data-quicklook-from="hard-finality">hard finality</a>](/how-arbitrum-works/reference/finality-and-reorgs.mdx#the-three-confirmation-levels).
```

Author: dup

## High availability: the Sequencer coordinator

> In production, several Sequencer nodes run under a single logical Sequencer, with the SeqCoordinator electing a single active leader via Redis. A chosen-sequencer key records the current leader, which holds a short, time-limited lockout (roughly one minute by default) that it must continually refresh. The active node writes signed messages to Redis; standby nodes follow along so that, if the leader fails or steps down, another can take over with minimal disruption. Activation clears any <a data-quicklook-from="forwarder">forwarders</a> and resumes block production; deactivation sets up forwarding to the new leader and pauses local production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In production, several Sequencer nodes run under a single logical Sequencer, with the SeqCoordinator electing a single active leader via Redis. A chosen-sequencer key records the current leader, which holds a short, time-limited lockout (roughly one minute by default) that it must continually refresh. The active node writes signed messages to Redis; standby nodes follow along so that, if the leader fails or steps down, another can take over with minimal disruption. <a data-quicklook-from="activation">Activation</a> clears any <a data-quicklook-from="forwarder">forwarders</a> and resumes block production; deactivation sets up forwarding to the new leader and pauses local production.
```

## Timeboost express lane

Timeboost layers a priority auction on top of the default <a data-quicklook-from="first-come-first-serve-fcfs">first-come, first-serve (FCFS)</a> ordering. Time is divided into fixed rounds (at least 10 seconds), and an offchain auction assigns each round an express-lane controller. That controller’s transactions take a dedicated <a data-quicklook-from="express-lane">express lane</a>: they are validated (correct sender, round, and chain ID), placed into a per-round ordering queue, and delivered in sequence with no advantage delay, while ordinary transactions wait out the 200ms delay before queuing.

## Censorship Timeout

As mentioned in the original [Arbitrum BoLD forum post](https://forum.arbitrum.foundation/t/aip-bold-permissionless-validation-for-arbitrum/23232/70?), the initial release of [Arbitrum <a data-quicklook-from="bold">BoLD</a>](/how-arbitrum-works/bold/gentle-introduction.mdx) includes a feature called Censorship Timeout (formerly known as Delay Buffer).

Censorship Timeout aims to limit the negative effects of:

- Prolonged Sequencer censorship, or
- Unexpected Sequencer outages

## How the Censorship Timeout works

> To explain how this feature improves the security of chains settling to Arbitrum One, consider a scenario where an <a data-quicklook-from="layer-3-l3">L3</a>’s parent chain Sequencer (the <a data-quicklook-from="L2">L2</a> Sequencer) is censoring or offline. In such a case, every <a data-quicklook-from="assertion">assertion</a> and/or sub-<a data-quicklook-from="challenge">challenge</a> move would need to wait 24 hours before bypassing the L2 Sequencer (using the Sequencer Inbox’s <a data-quicklook-from="forceinclusion">`forceInclusion`</a> method). In this scenario, a challenge resolution would be delayed by a time t where t = (24 hours) \* number of moves for a challenge. To illustrate with sample numbers, if a challenge takes 50 sequential moves to resolve, then the delay would be 50 days.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To explain how this feature improves the security of chains settling to <a data-quicklook-from="arbitrum-one">Arbitrum One</a>, consider a scenario where an <a data-quicklook-from="layer-3-l3">L3</a>’s parent chain Sequencer (the <a data-quicklook-from="L2">L2</a> Sequencer) is censoring or offline. In such a case, every <a data-quicklook-from="assertion">assertion</a> and/or sub-<a data-quicklook-from="challenge">challenge</a> move would need to wait 24 hours before bypassing the L2 Sequencer (using the Sequencer Inbox’s <a data-quicklook-from="forceinclusion">`forceInclusion`</a> method). In this scenario, a challenge resolution would be delayed by a time t where t = (24 hours) \* number of moves for a challenge. To illustrate with sample numbers, if a challenge takes 50 sequential moves to resolve, then the delay would be 50 days.
```

The Censorship Timeout feature mitigates this by lowering the force inclusion threshold when unexpected delays in message inclusion occur due to one (or all) of the above-mentioned cases of censorship or a sequencer outage, enabling entities to make moves without the 24-hour delay-per-move.

The force inclusion window is the lesser of `delayBuffer` and `delayBlocks`, where `delayBlocks` is a constant currently set to 24 hours, and `delayBuffer` ranges from 30 minutes to 48 hours.

> The `delayBuffer` value “grows and shrinks” depending on how long the Sequencer is offline or censoring transactions. As a way to measure this behavior, the `delayBuffer` is decremented by the difference between a delayed message’s delay beyond the `threshold` and how long it has been delayed (i.e., when some delayed messages are delayed by more than the `threshold`, the difference between the messages’ delay and the `threshold` is removed from the buffer). For example, if the threshold is 30 minutes and a message was delayed by 32 minutes, the `delayBuffer` is decremented by 2 minutes. The `threshold` is set to 30 minutes on Arbitrum One and 1 hour on Arbitrum Nova.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `delayBuffer` value “grows and shrinks” depending on how long the Sequencer is offline or censoring transactions. As a way to measure this behavior, the `delayBuffer` is decremented by the difference between a delayed message’s delay beyond the `threshold` and how long it has been delayed (that is, when some delayed messages are delayed by more than the `threshold`, the difference between the messages’ delay and the `threshold` is removed from the buffer). For example, if the threshold is 30 minutes and a message was delayed by 32 minutes, the `delayBuffer` is decremented by 2 minutes. The `threshold` is set to 30 minutes on Arbitrum One and 1 hour on Arbitrum Nova.
```

The `delayBuffer` replenishes at a linear rate when the Sequencer is operating correctly at a nominal rate of one minute for every 20 minutes in which no messages are delayed beyond the `threshold`.

Below are the initial, proposed parameter values for the Censorship Timeout feature for Arbitrum One and Nova:

- `delayBuffer` = 14400 parent chain (Ethereum) blocks (2 days)
- `threshold` = 150 L1 Ethereum blocks (30 minutes) for Arbitrum One and 300 parent chain (Ethereum) blocks (one hour) for Arbitrum Nova
- `replenish rate` = 5% (meaning one day is replenished every 20 days or roughly a 95% uptime)

> We believe that the Censorship Timeout feature provides stronger guarantees of censorship resistance for Arbitrum chains—especially those that settle to Arbitrum One or Arbitrum Nova. As always, chain owners can decide whether to utilize this feature for their chain and can also change the default parameters as they see fit for their use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We believe that the Censorship Timeout feature provides stronger guarantees of censorship resistance for Arbitrum chains—especially those that settle to Arbitrum One or Arbitrum Nova. As always, chain owners can decide whether to use this feature for their chain and can also change the default parameters as they see fit for their use case.
```
